>> I'm going to start you off
with a quote from Lao Tzu.
He said, "Those who
flow as life flows know
they need no other force."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Welcome back.
Today we're talking about
the flow state and shamanism.
So my favorite book on flow
is called "Stealing Fire."
And the authors Jamie
Wheal and Steven Kotler
founded what is called
the Flow Genome Project.
I believe that the
Flow Genome Project
is looking deeper into
flow and studying it more
than anybody else ever has.
Flow state, this zone,
is very well-documented.
You'll have athletes like Bill
Russell and Michael Jordan
consistently talking about
experiencing this zone
during high intensity games.
Even musicians, rock
bands, and orchestras
all mention that there seems
to be this higher organizing
force that everybody
else simply surrenders
to when the music
becomes that one
thing that all the
rest of the musicians
are simply the conduit for.
The music is coming
through them.
But it's not just for
athletes and musicians.
It's actually even
good in the workplace.
There was a 10-year study from
the "McKinsey" magazine that
said top-level executives become
five times more productive
when in the state of flow.
It also crops up in
spiritual states.
There is this feeling of oneness
in the spiritual traditions
and this ability to be
able to access information.
And the actions that need to
happen from that point forward
are effortless.
So now let's go to the guy
who coined the term flow
and flow state.
His name is Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi.
And he was studying flow
for quite some time.
And he said in regards
to extreme situations,
"You know what you need
to do is possible to do
even though difficult. And
the sense of time disappears.
You forget yourself.
And you feel part of
something larger."
This truly does sound spiritual,
this losing of one's self,
a disintegrating and merging
with the entire universe where
you are no longer
this little person,
but you are the entire
universe and the mind at large.
So if you think that
the state isn't for you,
it's only for
top-level athletes,
only for musicians
who have trained
their entire lives
or Navy SEALs,
people who have put their
entire lives into accessing
this state.
Well, remember what Johann
Wolfgang von Goethe said.
"Everything is hard
before it is easy."
But this doesn't mean that
we don't have obstacles
to the flow state.
All of us are very overwhelmed,
overworked, and exhausted.
We are what Steven Kotler, one
of the authors of "Stealing
Fire," calls 21st
century normal.
And when he describes what
21st century normal is,
he goes into what you can see
in the body physiologically.
So he says that hyperactivity
in the prefrontal cortex
comes online.
This is the higher cognitive
function of the brain,
our sense of morality,
and our sense of our will.
Our brainwaves go
into the beta state.
And then we have a steady
drip, drip of a stress hormone
called cortisol and another
one, norepinephrine.
But he goes on to say
that in the flow state,
the hyperactivity in
the prefrontal cortex,
that more human aspect
of our brain, goes quiet.
And therefore, so does
the inner critic within.
And then all of those
stressful hormones flush out.
And then we are flooded
with performance-enhancing
and also feel good hormones
like oxytocin, anandamide,
serotonin, and dopamine.
So the quieting of
this inner critic
is well-documented as well.
Michael Jordan is
one of those who
has talked about this state.
Michael Jordan also
is known as saying,
"Heart is what separates
the good from the great."
So let's take a
deeper look at heart.
Let's take a look at an episode
of "On the Road with Lilou"
where she interviews Howard
Martin in an episode called
At the Heart of it All.
>> So in the coherent state,
you have this highly-ordered
physiological and emotional
condition in yourself.
So everything from reaction
speed time to visual field,
all your sensitivities
are there.
You're more sensitive
to your environment.
to yourself.
You're more sensitive
to what's going on.
You have a greater
ability to choose.
You have a greater ability
to regulate your emotions.
Athletes equate that to
what happens in the zone.
So the measurement of coherence
is the closest measurement
that we know of to
measuring the zone.
So we've worked with
professional golfers,
professional football
players, Olympic athletes
of various kinds, gymnasts,
skiers, swimmers, all kinds.
And they use our technology
and our simple techniques
to find a way to develop more
of that coherence in themselves
naturally so that when they're
in athletic performance,
it becomes second nature
to them because they
can't think about
all that when they're
in the middle of
a football game.
>> So that's great.
There's two aspects
of what you just
heard that I would
like to point back out.
One is that coherence sounds
an awful lot like flow.
And number two is
that in this state,
information is organized
and ordered differently.
So that is a hallmark of an
altered state of consciousness.
Now, what if we could access
coherence or flow on demand?
What if we could just
call it up in the most
unlikely or difficult
circumstances?
So in gaming terms, this
would be called leveling up.
So how do we access flow?
Well, if we go back to
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi,
he not only studied flow
more than anybody else,
he coined that term flow.
But he also
identified that there
are three triggers to flow
that we can use in our lives
right now immediately.
And these three triggers
are having clear goals,
immediate feedback
from the challenge,
and also the proper
skill to challenge ratio.
Now clear goals are
knowing what I'm doing now
and what I'm going to do next
so the mind does not wander.
Immediate feedback is important
so we can change directions
if need be in the moment.
Skill to challenge
ratio is very specific.
It's actually if here
is your skill level,
then 4% above your skill
level is the optimal range
to trigger flow.
So you want the challenge to
be just outside of your skill
level, meaning this is
something that you have
to rise to the occasion for.
You need to reach to
arrive at this skill
to meet that challenge.
And then if these three
are done correctly,
it will prompt that state of
flow or coherence on demand.
But what is it that gets in
the way of us even setting out
on that path of training?
Even in the tasks that we
would love to train for,
what keeps us from being
able to just set out
on the path of discovering and
unlocking our human potential?
Well, could it be the
fear of the unknown?
Let's take a look at a
film called "Beyond Fear"
by Louie Schwartzberg.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I love to climb
mountains, ice climb.
And that's pretty wild, I
guess, for a blind person.
I mean, being a blind
mountain climber
is sort of like being
a Jamaican bobsledder.
The words don't
necessarily go together.
I'm scanning my
tools up the ice.
And I'm trying to use
the end of my tools
as though they are
extensions of my hands
where I'm actually
feeling through the metal
picks of my tools.
And when I find something
I think is a good hit,
I'll just tap it.
And I'll listen to the sound.
And if it's a good
sound, then I'll swing.
I think sometimes that fear of
reaching out into the unknown
paralyzes people to the
point where they just
decide not to reach out at all.
For me, all the great things
that have ever come to me
have come through reaching
out into that unknown.
And I think life is just sort of
an ongoing process of reaching
out into the darkness
when you really don't
know what you're going to find.
>> Truthfully, this is an
aspect of humanity that I love.
I truly adore it.
It is the ability for
us to face our fears
and go beyond them to reach
into the darkness, peer
beyond what our fears are, and
to see something quite familiar
staring straight back at us--
our higher potential.
This is truly what
humanity was built upon,
all those explorers
and mariners that
didn't know whether they
were going to make it back
from this treacherous journey.
But they still set out
to see what this path had
in store for them.
Statistically, we are not all
going to blaze our own trails.
We're not all going to face our
fears to the same magnitude.
But we are all given
the same hardware.
We are all set up
in the same way.
So it is possible for
every single one of us
to enter these states.
So what is it that separates us?
Let's take a look back at
ancient shamanism, maybe even
beyond ancient shamanism, to
that very first time somebody
ever ate a psychedelic
plant and started
entering this altered
state of reality,
fearing that maybe they
had poisoned themselves,
maybe they're dying, or
maybe they're meeting God.
Well, Stuart Hameroff, an
anesthesiologist and a quantum
theorist, says that
psychedelic compounds actually
enter the mind into
a quantum state,
that there is a state of reality
much finer than the scale,
this macroscopic scale
that we are living at,
that has information,
universal, timeless information
available to us.
If you look back in
time, all of the themes
that were drawn and painted
onto these cave walls
were shamanic in nature.
Very curious.
So is the shamanic state
and the psychedelic state
encrypted into our DNA, written
into our ancestral memory?
Let's take a look at a
show called "Psychedelica"
and what Graham Hancock
has to say about this.
>> That evidence, we first
encounter it in the painted
caves of upper paleolithic
Europe going back close
to 40,000 years ago past.
There are certain types
of imagery that regularly
and routinely crop up
in those deeply altered
states of consciousness
brought on by psychedelics.
And it is precisely
those types of imagery
that we find in the
ancient rock and cave art
all around the world.
>> Well, there is an interesting
set of findings about how
humans differ from our
chimpanzee relatives in terms
of the use of these psychedelics
and what happens in the body.
The human serotonergic
system is much more sensitive
to these substances.
The binding of the
serotonin neural receptors
with these psychedelics is two
to four times more powerful
than what happens
in chimpanzees.
>> So what does this mean?
Michael Winkelman
is just showing us
that we are hard-wired
for the psychedelic state.
Are we hardwired also
for the shamanic state
of consciousness?
Well, let's take a deeper look
at the shamanic state or even
the psychedelic state.
There's these phases
that seem to happen.
There's the coming
on phase where
you're starting to
feel it and then
you become entrenched in it.
Then there's the peak
phase where everything is
blasting at 100% full throttle.
And then there's the
coming down phase.
And then there's this afterglow,
another phase where things just
seem to kind of be hazy, but
also integrating, coming back
into the real world or
this consensus reality.
Well, now let's take a
look at this nifty graphic
that the Flow Genome
Project made up.
And it shows that there's also
this cycle to the flow state.
And they're looking at not only
the brainwave states, but also
the chemicals
inside the body that
are prompted at these times.
And it all starts
with the struggle.
The struggle state is
typified by beta brainwaves
and chemicals like cortisol
and norepinephrine.
That was that 21st century
normal that Steven Kotler
mentioned.
Now the next phase
is the release phase.
And it's typified
by alpha brainwaves.
Another thing that's
seen in the body
chemically is nitric
oxide at this phase.
It opens up the veins and
allows more blood, nutrients,
and oxygen to arrive
at all the tissues.
This is priming us for
the flow state, which
is the next part of the phase.
The flow state is typified in
brainwaves by theta and gamma
waves coming together, also
with endorphins, dopamine,
and anandamide as the chemicals
that flood through the body.
Anandamide is also a chemical
that we find in cannabis.
So then we go further
from this stage.
And we go in to the
rest or recovery phase.
And this is typified by
delta brainwaves, serotonin,
and oxytocin--
feel good chemicals.
So there are neurological
and chemical changes
for entering the flow state
and exiting the flow state.
Could it be the same
for what is called
shamanic flight or astral
travel when a shaman leaves
their body, their mind,
their consciousness, leaves
their body, travels
into another dimension
or across this three-dimensional
space that we live in?
Let's take a deeper
look at this phenomena
and see if we can't
somehow suss out
what's happening in the
brain and in the body
during this moment.
>> There is a well-known
phenomena of the out-of-body
experience or astral projection.
Well, what we know is that
there is a particular part
of the brain that's supposed
to integrate our sense of self
with our body, the
temporal parietal junction.
And when this part of the
brain is taken offline,
then we're able to
experience ourselves
independent of our body.
>> Does this mean that the
shaman simply convinces his
or her own brain that the
mind and body are separating?
And if so does that mean
that it's just a mirage?
Or is belief, imagination,
and creativity
the physical mechanisms by
which an aspect of the shaman
leaves his or her
body to perform work
in other dimensions?
Perhaps this is the
underlying knowledge
that shamans utilized
when crafting the healing
environment.
>> Shamans become healers.
They become good artists.
They can design
their own rituals.
They create their
own music and so on.
Again, what makes
the shaman a shaman
is that he or she had
the substantial number
of personal experiences.
>> So there are skilled
travelers, astral travelers,
leaving their body.
Well, Jamie Wheal,
he's the other author
for "Stealing Fire"
along with Steven Kotler.
And Jamie Wheal did
this YouTube video
where he asked three
pertinent questions.
Where does the information
come from in an altered state
of consciousness like flow or
like the psychedelic state?
In our default state
of consciousness
right now where
we typically are,
the brain is processing
about 120 bits of information
a second.
It's actually seen
that our brain
is able to process 11 million
bits of information per second
under these altered
states of consciousness.
That's a huge disparity.
Imagine winning $120
versus $11 million.
That's the difference
of the amount
of information
processing your brain has
under flow and shamanic status.
Question number two, are we
able to access more than just
what's in our body and in
our environment right now?
Are we able to go
back into our ancestry
and tap into what is
called epigenetic memory?
So to answer
question number two,
Jamie Wheal found some
epigenetic evidence.
There's this experiment where
lab mice, one control group,
and one experiment group,
the experiment group, a bell
would ring.
And then they would
shock the mice.
Again, the bell
would ring, it would
shock the mice over
and over and over again
throughout their lives.
And then eventually,
they would have pups.
And these pups would grow
up with the same treatment.
A bell would ring.
They would shock them.
They would receive a shock
over and over and over
again until these mice
had their own pups.
So these are the grandchildren
of the original mice.
These mice listened to
the sound of a bell,
but they didn't get shocked.
But the curious thing
was they still flinched.
They showed a
neurological contraction
in their entire
musculature as well.
So there's this memory
they were accessing
from their parents and
their grandparents,
whereas the control
group who were not
getting the shocks at the
sound of a bell never flinched.
This is evidence of
epigenetic memory.
And his third question is are
we receivers and transmitters
of information, rather
than just the brain
causing for consciousness
and storing data?
I've already shown you the
evidence in the lab mice.
And this is very interesting
that mind can move across time,
down through generations.
Now let's explore if mind
can move across space
and into the mind of another.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This is magnetite, one of
the most magnetic substances
on Earth.
As you can probably guess,
it has a diverse range
of uses from fridge magnets to
generating electricity in power
plants.
But what you probably
wouldn't guess
is that your brain actually
synthesizes these crystals.
And you have hundreds
of millions of them
inside your head.
Scientists are still
unsure what role, if any,
these crystals play in
the brain's function.
Studies have inferred
that it may play
a role in long-term memory.
It suggests that cellular
components of the brain
communicate with each other
through magnetic signals
with the magnetite particles
acting as tiny antennas
simultaneously
receiving information
throughout the different
parts of the brain.
Magnetite also
acts as an antenna
for external
electromagnetic fields,
including the geomagnetic
field of the Earth itself.
And this is where things
start to get interesting.
An enormous body of
research is emerging
that shows substantive links
between magnetic fields
and cognitive function.
Dr. Persinger has
shown in the laboratory
that magnetic brain stimulation
can create mental states
conducive to human telepathy.
A recent experiment placed
two people at a distance
in different rooms.
Each was surrounded by an
identical computer-controlled
magnetic field.
When a light was flashed
in one subject's eye,
the person in the other room
showed responses in their brain
as if they saw the
flash of light.
As Dr. Persinger
stated, "We think
that's tremendous because
it may be the first macro
demonstration of a quantum
connection or so-called quantum
entanglement."
>> So let me get this straight.
These crystals connect
us electromagnetically
with the Earth.
They're involved
in long-term memory
and in quantum telepathy.
Where do I buy them?
Well, the drug
dealer would probably
say, right here in my pocket.
But the researcher, the
psychonaut, the flow state
expert, would say, it's right
here encrypted into our body.
There is also something
else that our body produces
endogenously, not just
these crystals but DMT,
dimethyltryptamine.
It's one of the most powerful
psychedelic compounds
known to man.
And it's created right
here in the human body.
Author Dr. Rick Strassman
wrote a book "DMT--
The Spirit Molecule" explaining
all the incredible experiences,
mind-bending experiences, that
are outside of space and time
that happen from this drug
being injected into them.
But we produce it ourselves.
Another author, John
A. Chavez, wrote
a book called "Questions
for the Lion Tamer."
He uses a lot of evidence
and a lot of science
to support some pretty
wild speculations.
He even calls the
chapter Wild Speculations
because he wants to
show that evidence
can be there to support
that we know very little
about human consciousness.
And he starts
speculating that DMT
might be very integral to
telepathy, clairvoyance, heart
coherence, channeling, aha
moments, miraculous healings,
and even other
paranormal phenomena.
What is this state that
DMT seems to put us in?
What is the state
that these brain
crystals, these magnetite
crystals, help us enter into?
What is that flow state?
What is coherence?
What is the shamanic and
the psychedelic state?
What if they are all talking
about exactly the same thing?
What if we are the limitless
pill that we need to swallow
and that limitless pill
will open itself up and turn
into exactly what we
need in the moment
if we enter into the right
state of consciousness?
Are we able to affect future
generations in our family line
simply because we access
this state more and more?
Are we able to allow for our
children and their children
and the next seven
generations to be rewarded
with this gift, this
beautiful ability
to be able to access information
where life becomes effortless,
lyrical, poetic, and perfect?
I hope so.
And I hope you set
off on this path.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So as usual, I want to leave
you guys with some challenges
that you can employ in the week
to come before I see you next.
The first challenge is if
you are capable of running,
I want you to find
a patch of woods
where there's a lot of
dynamics, a lot of variables.
And I want you to run as fast
as you can through those woods.
Obviously, maintain your safety.
Obviously, wear your shoes.
But run as fast as you can.
Your analytical mind
is going to have
to quiet down because
you're not going to be
able to overthink the moves.
You just need to make
those moves in real time.
If you make a mistake, just
get up, dust yourself off,
keep going.
Once you find your
pace, I want you
to bump it up just about 4%.
This is that challenge to skill
ratio, that trigger for flow.
But what am I asking you?
4% is not actually that much.
If you walk a 10-minute
mile, bumping that up 4%
is only going to knock 20
to 30 seconds off that mile.
So it's not that much.
But it's just enough to
trigger the flow state.
Second challenge.
It's the shamanic challenge.
Find those in your community
that are truly in need.
It could be family.
It could be young
people, elders.
Whoever it is, find the
ones in need and serve them.
Because remember that
shamans weren't just
there to keep the health, the
physical health of the tribe,
they were also there
keeping the mental sanity.
So that's what I'm asking
you to be for your community.
Be an anchor for security.
Now I want to leave you with
a quote from Mahatma Gandhi.
I think it sums up this
entire episode perfectly.
He said, "The best way to find
yourself is to lose yourself
in the service of others."
I hope you take this to heart.
And I'll see you around
next time on "Limitless."
[MUSIC PLAYING]